
# Results

## Answers to the empirical research questions

> **ERQ1**: How is the observed daily positioned with regard to descriptions of Scrum daily and kanban systems in the theory?

A daily in the Scrum methodology, as described in \ref{scrum-daily}, is a short, all-hands meeting held every day. The context of a daily is the ongoing development iteration, or sprint, and the topic will be predefined by the sprint's agenda. The daily's function is defined by the responsibilities of each team member attending: to discuss progress of work items and to communicate any potential impediments. The goal is thus to "keep the ball moving", focus on the essentials of what needs to be done and empower the team members to support each other in the process.

The observed practice is a daily, but it is decidedly not a Scrum one. On the very surface of things, with an average duration of 35 minutes (\ref{durations-and-segments}) the daily is significantly longer than the 15 minutes recommended for Scrum. Furthermore, the context of the daily is not a sprint with a fixed agenda, but instead a collection of interrelated, ongoing development processes. Some of these processes are best described as cycles or iterations with a predefined start and conclusion, but not all. The daily was segmented by the use of kanban boards that were heterogenous in structure, which reflected the team's pluralistic understanding of their work.

In terms of absolute time expenditure by segment, we can conclude that the daily has the following main functions: accounting for new information (in the `INBOX` segment), addressing urgent, non-planned work (`FIRES` segment), relating the general status of work, scheduling and impediments (`INTRO`), and keeping track of "discussions", such as improvement of workflows (`OUTBOX`).  Secondary functions, which occurred more rarely but on which significant time was spent per occurrence, consist of development cycle reviews and planning (`BOARD OVERVIEW`, `CYCLES`). Auxiliary functions would include keeping track of non-software-development work, work required for customer relations, and urgent but non-critical work.

According to the literature presented in section \ref{lean-perspective}, kanban systems are a visual work coordination device which allow for inspecting the workflow, or the process through which work items pass through the system. Its purpose is to allow those completing the work to identify the work to be done and act on this information swiftly. This speeds up delivery and enhances learning, while allowing identification of waste throughout the process. A kanban system is intended to be improved upon in a process of continuous improvement, which is collaborative in nature to avoid suboptimization. The use of kanban requires supporting practices, such as those from agile methodologies.

Outside the daily, the team members use the work items represented in their virtual kanban boards to determine what they should be working on at any given time. In section \ref{typical-segments} we observed that the kanban boards encode relevant workflows when they are understood, such as software development work. As we saw in section \ref{structural-change}, the layout and structure of the boards is linked to how the daily plays out and is adjusted in the daily. Critically, the members' understanding of *how* the boards are used to communicate what there is to be done is shaped during the daily. The team applies the agile practice of a daily to support their collaborative use of a kanban system.

The team is careful to limit their work in progress as much as they can, but realise that there is some work that is urgent enough to be expedited even at the cost of increasing the amount of things being worked on concurrently. The team's use of the `INBOX` is a mechanism for segregating possible work items into those that can be scheduled for later and those that must be reacted to immediately. Because the team continuously handles any urgent but unplanned work in the `FIRES` segment, they are well equipped for being able to see a category of waste that might be called "rework"; they are aware of their past mistakes and the costs incurred due to addressing them. Finally, the team has a habit of being explicit about their process and its collaborative improvement. The `OUTBOX` segment serves as a means of keeping track of drives for improvement as well as explicating any outcomes thereof.

In summary, the use of a kanban system with the practice of a daily allows the team to apply virtually all of the kanban principles, which taken together support the lean goal of continuous improvement. The daily also allows the team to accept feedback and adjust their priorities on work to be completed on a day-to-day basis. This distinction from the Scrum daily may be seen as significant, expanding the scope of activity from "progress of predefined work items" to "redefining work and its priorities". It comes at a cost, however, in that the observed dailies were a significant expenditure in terms of the development team's time.

> **ERQ2**: How do contradictions and their transformations manifest in the observed dailies?

Activity theory was presented in section \ref{improvement-in-practice} as a way to study innovation in social interactions. According to the activity theoretical viewpoint, innovation happens in practices described as activity systems. Activity systems inherently feature structural tensions that may be resolved through a process of expansive learning. Expansive learning may be taken as a progression of constructing contradictory conditions in a practice and resolving them through transformations of that practice. Describing a practice as an activity system and investigating both contradictions and their transformations in the practice is a way to observe the kind of continuous improvement process introduced in section \ref{ci}.

Deriving from the answer to **ERQ1**, the observed daily may be described as an activity system which exists to make sense of the work that is to be done. The object of activity is the collection of kanban boards and work items therein, and thus the sense-making is achieved by means of inspecting and manipulating the boards and the items. The daily is multi-voiced in terms of bringing together manager, developer and quality assurance perspectives. Historicity is featured in both the participants' understanding of what happens in a daily carrying over from one daily to the next, as well as in hints of the daily structure being encoded in the boards.

Disturbances, according to section \ref{contradictions}, are deviations from standard script or breaks of habit and indicate change potential in an activity system. By paying attention to apparent disturbances in the dailies, expressions of contradictions in the activity system could be found and analyzed. In some cases the team could take advantage of these expressions and make changes to the daily so that the contradictions were resolved. An unaddressed contradiction means that the team could not harness the change potential and improve; it could also be interpreted to result from a change that has been found not to be an improvement after all. Changes to the practice that propagate through four tiers of contradiction constitute an expansive learning cycle and become part of new accepted practice.

Section \ref{episodes-of-contradiction} identified contradictions exemplifying the daily as relating to effective use of collective time in the daily or outside (primary contradiction), matching work items to suitable boards (secondary), coming to agreement on the implications of a modelling (tertiary), and cross-team coordination (quaternary). Typical to the analysed disturbances was discontent with the modelling: either the model of the situation was experienced as misleading from reality, or the intended course of action was not readily apparent from the model. Addressing the discontent tended to take the form of modifying a single work item, altering a board's structure, deciding on new ways of making work items flow through them or making novel distinctions based on existing constructs.

Transformations tended to be *additive* in nature, not subtractive; the tendency was towards more work items on the boards, more boards for work items and more finely grained process states for items. Subtractive transformations were seen when time constraints for the daily clashed with requirements of modelling, in which case whole segments were discarded from the daily. In these cases, the boards corresponding to those segments would still be in the model.

Some observed contradictions and transformations could be understood as belonging to sequences of actions in the expansive learning cycle. Section \ref{journey-of-transformation} describes one cycle where the team identifies a problem with work item categorisation, and creates new boards for reflecting different work item urgencies and stakeholders. As a result, incoming work items are not considered on a binary "fire or not" basis, but a larger spectrum of potential reactions is admitted. This reflects the team collectively having a more detailed understanding of the nature of work they are completing. Finally, the team is able to take a more active role in directing the flows of work items instead of absconding that responsibility.

The progression of disturbances bubbling up, contradictions being expressed, transformations getting suggested and being tried out was continuous. Rare was the daily where not a single transformation step played out. Multiple threads of interrelated transformations could be observed, meaning there were many overlapping cycles of expansive learning ongoing at any time.

In the observed dailies, discovering latent contradictions relating to the kanban model and its use, accompanied with transformations to the same, were identified as the engine to improving the practice. The daily practice allowed these actions to be taken in a manner that can most aptly be described as continuous. Contradictions and transformations therefore manifested as the social mechanism enabling continuous improvement to take place.


## Answer to the research problem

> **RP:** How can the practice of a daily in conjunction with a kanban system support continuous improvement?

The practice of a daily in conjunction with a kanban system supports continuous improvement in a software development team by providing a structure in which the kanban system is observed, new input can be considered and waste may be identified collaboratively, and by serving as a context in which failures in the practice may be brought up and through a process of expansive learning help the team transform the practice.

The theoretical framework describes continuous improvement in practice as a process of collaborative and continuous innovation. Innovation is understood as successive surfacing and resolution of contradictions in a practice by transforming the team's object of activity and thus the practice itself. In the empirical study, the practice of a daily was established and disturbances in the practice were observed, linking them to transformations in the object of activity that the team encoded as changes to the kanban system.

## Discussion

The results of this thesis lie at the intersection of the agile and lean software development discourses. Agile models are described as well documented and readily adaptable \citep{abrahamsson2002agile}, but with them being empirically derived it is difficult to say why they work or to modify them successfully \citep[p. xiii-xvi]{poppendieck2003lean}. Lean software development consists of principles that serve as guiding ideas and insights, but are not easy to apply situationally \citep{poppendieck2003lean}, and even when concrete methods such as kanban are suggested they require supporting methods and significant effort to take up \citep{ahmad2013kanban}.

\citet{poppendieck2003lean} describe creation of software as inherently a learning activity. However, these claims are made from the viewpoint of and to the benefit of a value-producing system whose output is software. For example, kanban espouses 'collaborative improvement' \citep{anderson2010kanban} because it helps avoid suboptimization \citep[lean principle 7][]{poppendieck2003lean} of the system. The workings of an innovative knowledge community \citep{hakkarainen2004communities}, the social context in which the learning and collaborative improvement would happen, is not something lean is positioned to describe.

This thesis suggests the activity theoretical perspective \citep{engestrom1999perspectives} as complementing the agile and lean discourses. In summarization by \citet{hakkarainen2004communities}, activity theory holds that the source of innovation is overcoming tensions inherent in the activity. A method leveraging this feature is offered by which the daily, a concrete practice at the heart of the agile Scrum methodology \citep{west2010agile}, can be observed as supporting continuous improvement, a tenet of lean following from the principle of waste reduction \citep{bhuiyan2005overview}.

The use of activity theory allowed pointing out *specific features* of the observed daily practice as enabling continuous improvement. Disturbances were felt by team members in social interaction, which allowed surfacing contradictions in the practice. Identifying contradictions afforded transformation of the practice. Transformations didn't always work out to yield direct improvements, but progressions of identified contradictions and attempted transformations could do so. These are the ingredients of social innovation.

An activity theoretical perspective and vocabulary may be appropriated as a tool in the software development process improvement toolkit. To evaluate the effectiveness of a concrete practice which aims at continuous improvement, practitioners may therefore ask questions relating to how the practice affords these actions to take place. Such implications are discussed in section \ref{practical-implications}.

The daily is a part of everyday life, not interventionary. It is the recurrent nature of a daily which avails it as a means for continuous transformation.


## Conclusions

The objective of the thesis was to describe the use of a daily practice in conjunction with the use of a kanban system such that the concept of a daily itself might be expanded upon from dictates of agile software methodology. This was done by searching for evidence that such a use of the daily would support the lean goal of continuous improvement, as the use of a kanban system also does. The theoretical objective was to find a way to describe the daily in such a way as to make possible the identification of mechanisms supporting continuous improvement, which was served by the use of an activity theoretical framing of the daily activities. The empirical study was conducted to further this line of argumentation.

The use of a kanban system could be observed to provide a structure for the daily practice. The object of the daily activity was a visualization of work in the kanban system, with the objective of grooming new input and collaboratively responding to changing situations and priorities by manipulating kanban tokens. An activity theoretical model of expansive learning was offered as an explanatory model for how continuous improvement occurs. Disturbances that reflect different levels of contradictions in the practice were identified as necessary for the process of improvement.

The analysis in this thesis contributes to efforts of devising and implementing practices based on lean software development, which have the goal of continuous improvement. The results suggest that such practices may benefit from analysis on how they enable the surfacing of disturbances and transformations of the contradictions implied by them.
