
# Implications of the study {#implications}

The following section discusses the implications of this study. Implications are divided into practical implications, where views and recommendations on the design of practices on continuous improvement in software development are shared, and theoretical implications which consider directions of future research based on results from this study.

## Practical implications

The nature of findings is in part to challenge received views and informing and improving practice \citep{robinson2007ethnographically}. It may be considered unlikely that a receiver of the account of practice elaborated in this study would wish to imitate the practice directly. The researcher hopes that the account may challenge the standard view of both the usefulness of a daily and the application of kanban in software development. Perhaps a receiver will be able to draw inspiration from the claimed benefits of a different kind of daily and be able to use this to structure their own practice; or perhaps they will be reminded of latent opportunities for continuous improvement.

It would be false to claim the observed daily practice as an unqualified success. The study showed that there is value in spending time on a daily, but perhaps the observed daily was still too long, too unfocused, and too neglecting of the value of its participants' time. The fact that participants were observed anxious to move forward from segment to segment could be interpreted as an indicator of boredom or dissatisfaction. The actions taken in dailies also did not have an especially democratic nature, with manager participants taking a large degree of the initiative, which again might be taken antithetical to aims of self-directed action espoused in lean.

Considering the mentioned drawbacks and the obvious situated nature of a specific practice, recommending any of the concrete methods in use in the observed daily would be folly. However, the research points out specific qualities and aims which the observed daily reflected at least to a degree and which would be beneficial for those applying lean principles to keep in mind. The researcher humbly submits the following suggestions for consideration.

- Focus on the journey of improvement.
- Provide an arena for collaboratively inspecting a workflow.
- Embrace disturbances as indicative of change potential.
- Expect further contradictions.

Focus on the ability to change and the collaborative journey to improvement. Because there is no one right way to do things, the important thing is not to determine such a way and monitor whether your execution is on target. Instead, it is beneficial to design for mechanisms which support change and learning, not enforcing static structures.

A modelling of your team's workflow does little to help the team improve if there is no time and place to interpret and react to what the modelling is telling you. Provide an arena for workflow to be inspected collaboratively. Such an arena serves the dual purpose of facilitating the creation of collaborative understanding of the work in practice and enabling identification of contradictions. A resulting intersubjective understanding of the current state of practice should help out in being able to collaboratively model transformations of the practice.

Improvement feeds on disturbances. Foster a culture in which failures, mistakes and contradictory demands may be brought to light as they occur. Structure practices in such a way that they do not break down in the presence of disturbances, so that the disturbances do not need to be extinguished and may instead serve as fuel for collaborative learning.

There will be resistance to change. It manifests through contradictions exerted by the part of practice you are trying to change, different parts of the same practice, and other interacting practices. Expect these sources of friction and be ready to address them in order to continue with a fruitful process of transformation. Yielding at the first sign of opposition is not a recipe for affecting change. Instead, leverage collaborative capability to transform ways of doing and thinking – this is how effective change is achieved, not through a process of imposition which will leave latent contradictions unresolved.

These suggestions are a detachment from the way agile software development might be taught to practitioners. They caution against cargo cult and dogma, asking that a practitioner understand why they are doing what they do and how to go about changing their ways of operating. Yet they also communicate that directions of improvement are fundamentally found in collaborative action, and that the acts of improvement also need to be taken collaboratively. The suggestions offer lean practitioners reminders on constraints and realities which may support development of ways of working.


## Theoretical implications

The theoretical objective of this study was to gain an understanding of how specific practices in software development may be seen as contributive to a process of continuous and collaborative improvement. An activity theoretical perspective of practices was applied to further this goal such that it could not only explain empirical data but serve as a unifying measure in evaluating practices described in the agile and lean discourses of software development.

The research suggests that the use of activity theory to describe practices in the field of software development has explanatory power. We found that the degree to which a practice supported collaborative learning could be analysed by identifying episodes of disturbance which reflected steps in the expansive learning cycle. The activity theoretical perspective therefore offers avenues for further research into software development practices.

The dailies were seen as an arena for expansive learning to take place. In accordance with the research results, expansive learning within lean software development may occur over a time span of days in a continuous process. This is in contrast to the timeboxed "sprint" approach from agile literature, which implies that new input to the process and improvement of the ways of work should happen in interventionary reflection sessions every couple of weeks. If such measures *are* wanted, perhaps their design may be aided by leveraging existing research on interventions from the field of activity theory, such as the ChangeLab method by \citet{engestrom1996change}.

The research took as a central construct the kanban system used by the team, and the empirical data was interpreted in a way that supports the claim that the system's malleability was an affordance for the team's ability to affect transformations on their practices. The theoretical framework also conceptualised the daily as it exists in agile as a significantly more constrained event, such that it would be unlikely to exhibit the kinds of qualities found in the observed dailies. The strength of this claim could be investigated more thoroughly in an inspection of the occurrence of disturbances in a more traditionally "Scrum" kind of daily, yielding evidence of the degree to which it is the use of a kanban system specifically that enables the team to improve on their practices.

In section \ref{process-of-innovation} we delimited the scope of this study to the activity theoretical perspective, in which we consider the process of innovation as that of collaborative contradiction resolution. This was a choice fitting for the investigation of the interactions between daily participants as the focal element, but there is another option. Consider the possibility that we wanted to instead investigate the way the team uses the kanban boards as a knowledge object. In this case we could've done well by picking the *conceptual artefact* based model of knowledge building \citet{bereiter2002education}, contrasted to Engeström's model by \citet{hakkarainen2004communities}. A study where the conceptual artefacts are taken in focus could, for instance, look deeper into the team's use of their tools and find links between the specific ways of using kanban and furthering collaborative learning.

There are evident opportunities in taking the approach from this study further. In the empirical study, fragments of different expansive learning cycles in different phases were observed which suggests that over time, some of these cycles run to completion while some may not. A more longitudinal research could reveal the dynamics of these cycles, which could provide advice on how a daily-like event should be used and structured to optimal benefit and which situational factors affect choices around structuring. Open directions of questioning also include the assumption of a *daily* event, or whether an alternate pacing should be considered, along with whether this choice affects the ways in which disturbances and transformations crop up.

In conclusion, the contribution of this study is to establish the use of activity theory as a valid lens through which to inspect practices in software development. This opens up opportunities in the form of tools in the activity theory toolkit, and practice based research in the large, as being applicable in a software development context. Finally, the study establishes that certain practices in software development may be seen as supporting learning not in individuals but in teams. In other words, the study implies that lean software development practices may support organisational learning.
