
# Evaluation {#evaluation}

The form of this study is a literature review combined with an empirical case study. This section evaluates the study from perspectives of credibility (\ref{credibility}) and inherent limitations (\ref{limitations}).

## Credibility, transferability, dependability and confirmability {#credibility}

The research in this thesis encompasses a qualitative \citep{creswell2009research} case study \citep{eisenhardt1989building} with an ethnographic approach \citep{lecompte1982problems}.  \citet{lincoln1985naturalistic} suggest that qualitative studies in general be evaluated on criterias of credibility, transferability, dependability and confirmability. \citet{lecompte1982problems} define the problems of ethnographic research specifically to lie in the capability to establish properties of reliability and validity, which will be linked to the four aforementioned properties in this section.

Credibility is the quality of truthfulness and persuasiveness in causalities and relationships inferred in a study. \citep{lincoln1985naturalistic} The reasoning in this study followed an abductive inference to the best explanation \citep{dubois2002systematic}, in which an iterative interplay between theoretical framework and empirical analysis affords the search of a theory with suitable explanatory power. This is consistent with descriptions of case study research process in general \citep{eisenhardt1989building} and ethnographical studies specifically \citep{lecompte1982problems}.

Transferability is the degree to which findings can be generalized, or whether the findings can be applied in other contexts and to other research subjects. \citep{lincoln1985naturalistic} In qualitative research, transferability cannot be determined by the evaluator, but by the receiver. \citep{eisenhardt1989building,guba1989fourth} In ethnography this determination is supported by the research goals of comparability and translatability. \citep{lecompte1982problems} As suggested by \citet{lecompte1982problems}, in this study comparability is supported by delineating the characteristics of the group under observation and the constructs generated in the study such that there exists a basis for comparison for other groups, whereas confident translation is likewise supported by describing research methods, analysis and characteristics of phenomena and groups as explicitly as possible. This is compatible with the requirement by \citet{lincoln1985naturalistic} that the receiver be able to assess applicability to other context by thick description of the research context, theory, methods and findings of the study.

Dependability is defined as the consistency of the study with the capability to provide results independent from the researcher's identity. \citep{guba1989fourth} In ethnographical studies, this is taken by \citet{lecompte1982problems} to be a herculean problem, as the observed phenomena are often unique and the fact of whether the results could be replicated is difficult to establish satisfactorily. \citet{lecompte1982problems} recommend that the problem be addressed in terms of external and internal reliability. According to the suggestion, this study reports on the researcher's role within the group, delineates the physical context of the study, outlines theoretical premises that shaped the research, and describes data collection strategies used. Internal reliability is enhanced by means of low-inference descriptors, or being as concrete and precise in description and presenting verbatim quotes when possible, which is aided by the use of mechanically recorded data, in this case audio recordings.

Confirmability refers to qualities of neutrality and freedom from bias, values and prejudice. \citep{guba1989fourth} Confirmability is justified by ensuring that findings in the study can be traced to the underlying data through an audit trail of inference. \citep{lincoln1985naturalistic} In this study, confirmability is afforded by the rich description of empirical study data and findings. The researcher links this property to what \citet{lecompte1982problems} define as validity, or the the extent to which conclusions represent reality. For purposes of establishing internal validity, this research establishes data that remains stable over the observation period, uses theoretical sampling as a purposive strategy, and accounts for changing group membership and presence over time. External validity is considered by the use of theory to present the observed group's constructs such that they are comparable, and alleviates construct effects with the use of first and third degree data collection methods to validate the understanding of those constructs as being applicable for the group.


## Limitations of the study {#limitations}

This study being ethnographical, the goal was not to generate results generalizable outside the study, rather than to describe the observed phenomena systematically and relate the findings in comparable and translatable fashion \citep{lecompte1982problems}. Considering also the activity theoretical perspective taken, \citet{jonassen2012theoretical} warns about the tool being descriptive rather than prescriptive and recommends care to be taken in generalizing the descriptions. There is no expectation that the answers given in the study provide direct solutions to specific problems \citep{robinson2007ethnographically}.

The researcher was an established member of the community of practice under investigation, which provided benefits in that the observation situation was less intrusive \citep{lethbridge2005studying} and the researcher could draw on more background to make his interpretations of ongoings \citep{robinson2007ethnographically}. Such a position also carries inherent tension  \citep{robinson2007ethnographically}: if the researcher is part of the community of practice, how do would they be able to consider anything 'strange'? The possibility of an effect by this tension on the research may only be mitigated, not altogether removed.

The study described the means by which the practice of a daily may support a team's self-directed change of its own practices, which was linked to innovation and further to continuous improvement. However, the linkage provided is only theoretical and, hopefully, plausible for the receiver. An empirically verified causal link from the daily practice to *waste reduction* in the process of software development was not the objective of this study and could not be shown.

Data collection for the study was limited in extensivity, scope, and quality. The duration of the observation period chosen for this study was sufficient to reach conclusions about the existence of expansive learning actions within the practice. The duration was not, however, lengthy enough such that we could have observed cycles of learning that might reasonable be considered 'whole'. Likewise, the scope of the investigation was merely the daily, not software development activities overall. The interplay between daily activities and the practice of software development outside the daily was not investigated. We could not show a causal link from activities in the daily to actual waste reduction elsewhere, only infer that one would exist given the supporting structure. Within the scope of the daily, the audio recordings used as primary data in this study were not by their nature sufficient to fully capture manipulation of work items on kanban boards. Specifically, how the work items discussed by the team moved in the daily was largely unassessable, which limits ability to attain post-hoc understanding of the practice.
