
\chapter{Introduction}

> *We want our organizations to be adaptive, flexible, self-renewing, resilient, learning, intelligent – attributes found only in living systems. The tension of our times is that we want our organizations to behave as living systems, but we only know how to treat them as machines.*
>
> \cite[The irresistible future of organizing]{wheatley1996self}

This thesis studies the use of a daily meeting in support of software development activities. The study searches for evidence that the daily contributes to a team's capability for innovation. An ethnographical case study is conducted within a software development team using a kanban work visualization in their daily meetings. The case study is analyzed through the lens of practice-based activity theory to identify how the daily enables continual transformation of the kanban system.

The theoretical objective of this thesis is to describe the social mechanisms of continuous improvement in the practice of software development. Continuous improvement is taken as the defining characteristic of methods that aim at waste reduction according to lean principles, such as the use of a kanban system. The analysis contributes to efforts of developing methods and practices for supporting software development in scenarios where continuous improvement is desired.

This chapter describes the background against which this study is set and delineates the research problem. Theoretical research questions are posed based on the research problem, to be answered in chapter II. Finally, the scope and goals of the study are defined and the structure of this thesis is introduced.
