
# Background and motivation {#motivation}

The daily has become part of IT industry vernacular. Stemming from the popular Scrum methodology of agile software development, dailies are a very commonplace occurrence in the field. The word refers to a meeting of development team members taking place every day. When methods such as the daily are applied, they don't always result in the intended benefits. The situation is problematic for practitioners, because agile methodologies as process handbooks do not readily offer guidance on improving. If it's not working, you are not doing it right.

A new school of lean software development aspires to supplant Scrum and its ilk as the *de facto* approach to software processes. Lean's purported advantage is that it provides principles based on which concrete methods may be developed, and espouses continuous improvement of ways of doing as a core goal. The perspective lean offers on software development is that it can be seen as a value-producing system with flows and feedback loops. This systems thinking is evident in lean-derived methods such as kanban visualizations of work.

It cannot be that the mere existence of a kanban modelling allows continuous improvement to take place. Instead, it must be that the improvement happens somehow in conjunction with the use of such a method by practitioners. How does kanban inspire practitioners to make changes and to improve their methods? The tools of neither agile nor lean are apt at describing such mechanisms, so we must reach for understanding elsewhere. Innovation in social interactions has been studied in practice-based activity theory. In this thesis, a case study is conducted to evaluate whether activity theory is applicable as a lens through which continuous improvement can be observed.


## The rise of agile {#rise-of-agile-and-lean}

Agile software development methods have become mainstream \citep{west2010agile}. Agile might be seen as a reaction to the failure of existing models of software development, in terms of their capabilities to both match reality and to facilitate the process of building better software. Software development is not like building a house, so attempting to understand and deconstruct the process in a similar fashion lead to less than stellar results. Such plan-driven approaches had their failings, and agile was the antidote.

Agile encompasses methodologies which reflect the quality of "agility" to varying degrees \citep{abrahamsson2002agile} as well as a manifesto which encapsulates some of its early evangelists' most important values \citep{agile2001manifesto}. Methodologies under the agile umbrella have been characterized with simplicity and ease of adaptation as key \citep{abrahamsson2002agile}. Agile is represented as the antithesis of dogma, being fit for critical inspection and malleable to use-case specific needs.

There is no one single way to run a team or company "the agile way" \citep{kruchten2007voyage}. There is, however, consensus on some things. Necessity of face-to-face interaction is emphasized in agile literature as critical for transfer of ideas and achieving innovative results. \citep{highsmith2002agile} In the agile manifesto, this was considered important enough for it to take first place on a list of agile values: "individuals and interactions over processes and tools". \citep{agile2001manifesto} One thing that is undeniably part of the agility toolkit is the daily. A daily meeting of developers, or "the daily Scrum" as described in the Scrum methodology, could be construed to have become a symbol of sorts for agility itself based on its influence on the industry. \citet{west2010agile} claim it the most used of a agile methods they investigated.

Agile's very nature seems to have changed with introduction to the mainstream \citep{west2010agile}. There is a by-the-book description of what a daily is in the literature, yet owing to the malleability of agile, the implementation of dailies will likely vary. For instance, time constraints of a daily may be relaxed or the general agenda modified if it is found that they do not aid in reaching desired goals \citep{marchenko2008scrum}. But if there's no definite way, knowing if you're doing the right things or going in the right direction is notoriously difficult. \citet{marchenko2008scrum} cite problems like "too many meetings" and disciplined effort required to "keep it simple" as present challenges. Practitioners who would like to discover their own ways of implementing agility have been disappointed by agile's lack of first principles which to use when deriving new methods. \citep[p. xiii-xvi]{poppendieck2003lean}


## Capacity for reaction as the differentiator {#capacity-for-reaction}

One could consider an important difference between agile and lean to be the degree of responsivity to new input. As per Scrum, an agile team is run in *iterations* or *sprints* <!-- FIXME: Definition? --> with a fixed agenda. This is based on the idea that *timeboxing* <!-- FIXME: Definition? --> allows a team to focus on essential things needing to be done. A lean process, on the other hand, is built upon the concept of *pull-based flow*. Team members will pull work items for themselves <!-- FIXME: Will do what? --> when they are ready to do so, and it is the job of the system built around the team to make sure they have work items to pull in. Fundamentally, a timeboxed team will take into account new input before the start of a sprint, while every instance of a work item being *pulled* into the flow is an opportunity to reflect on new information. A visualization of the flow of work used in lean is called a *kanban board*, a concept related to Scrum's aptly named *Scrum board* which is used to detail a sprint's work items <!-- FIXME: Optional: Could be improved with more description. -->.

A question that both agile and lean attempt to answer in their own ways is "how does one operate in a changing environment?" Agile takes a somewhat constrained view by recognizing that when delivering software to customers, their needs can and will be changed. Lean's perspective is grander in that it admits for *ways of doing* needing to change as understanding grows and situations change.

Agile's understanding of change lies on the level of requirements set for software <!-- FIXME: Optional: Citation(s) would connect this to the literature reviewed at the beginning of the chapter. -->. These can be by virtue of <!-- FIXME: due to, for example --> a changing business environment, better understood requirements for the system under development or any number of surprises often so characteristic of projects in real life. The reality of the situation is then accommodated for by building software such that it is amenable to changes in plans with the least amount of effort. Lean takes the challenge up another level, from how software is built and requirements found out, to how that process of constructing the software is discovered. A lean process is one which can be continually adapted to better serve the needs it is addressing.

Perhaps these two pieces can be taken together to form a discourse <!-- FIXME: Irrallinen lause, teksti jatkuu luontevasti sen yläpuolella ja jälkeen. Mikä idea? -->. Agile originally offered the promise of ways to build better software, but was easily oversold as a silver bullet, leading to failures in adoption and disillusionment. Clearly there was something positive there, but how could *our* organisation make use of it? The path to agile adoption was anything from clear. Enter lean software development: with the endorsement of ideas like "start where you are" and "continuous improvement", one could conceptually figure out the *path* to enlightenment instead of the ostensible *destination* <!-- FIXME: Love this line, but the end land a bit funny. -->.

## Why would you have a daily? {#why-daily}

In concluding section \ref{rise-of-agile-and-lean} we brought up the fact that agile is largely defined by methodologies, or sets of bundled methods claimed to work together. A team applying Scrum could therefore have a daily <!-- FIXME: Kannattaisiko sun määritellä puhuvasi agile dailyistä? Tai jotenkin määritellä aiemmin että daily on nimenomaan agile practice, mutta toisaalta sä puhut siitä myös toisessa merkityksessä (lean-agile tjsp). --> because it is ascribed in the methodology without being aware of why they should choose to do this. However, taking a note from the previous section and admitting that ways of doing can be questioned, let's assume that the team is equipped with a sense of reflexivity sufficient to ask the very reasonable question: why would you have a daily?

It is easy to come up with arguments on how the daily might not be an effective use of its participants' time. They are synchronous, meaning participants must be present simultaneously. <!-- FIXME: What about location? --> Though the recommended time box for a daily is 15 minutes, this limit may well remain unheeded (as we will observe in the empirical study). Throughout that time, no code is written, no bugs are fixed, no features are implemented, and no customer is served. There are very real opportunity costs associated with having a daily. Making the assumption that the daily is not mandated by external factors (such as perhaps an external consultant insisting on a strict adherence to Scrum), is there some other value that the team sees in spending that time?

It must be that the team itself has a hypothesis, an understanding of the value sought, or it would not choose to have dailies. The use of the method would not stick. (Indeed, the use of a daily is not universal. \citep{west2010agile} <!-- FIXME: Avoid double parenthesis when possible because asides stretch the tone for an academic text, or use (foo [bar]). -->) For a team aware of the costs, making the contrary choice would be deliberately wasteful, so let us further assume that not to be the case. The people engage in something that has no value in terms of software development work done, but is ostensibly worthy of spending everyone's time on *every day*. Because no tangible "work" gets done, it follows that the time left for that work afterwards can hypothetically be spent more effectively. The daily's role must be in somehow enhancing the organisation's effectiveness, meaning capability for value-adding service delivery.

The daily's capability to enhance effectiveness may be called to question, should we overlay the daily with the use of a kanban system for work visualization <!-- FIXME: Tässä lauseessa on jotain vikaa. -->. Consider a daily with an agenda defined by the Scrum sprint's goals. We would think that when the agenda is fixed and can be known to parties beforehand, the discussion and actions undertaken will be directed towards getting those things done in the fashion the team believes to be best. "I did X yesterday, I'm going to do Y today and will be needing help with Z" would be an apt description of a common schema that each team member could use their chance of communicating at the daily for. Yet with us now <!-- FIXME: Saila ei tykkää retorisesta monikosta. --> having a way to tell exactly what the mentioned X, Y and Z are by taking a look at the visualization of our work, one might consider the daily to be redundant <!-- FIXME: Mistä tää tulee? Siitä että Scrum board on visualisointi? -->.

<!-- FIXME: Mä en keksi mitä nää viimeiset kappaleet tuo tähän lisää. Jos sieltä pitää noukkai joku ajatus leanista niin nouki se sieltä seasta - introssa ei ole aikaa alkaa harhailla. -->

There is, however, another problem. Software development is not done against a static, unchanging background <!-- FIXME: Onko tämä kappale toistoa osiosta "capacity for reaction as the differentiator"? -->. This is indeed the basis on which modern methodologies build upon and where they derive their usefulness from, as discussed in section  \ref{rise-of-agile-and-lean}. We can say, at the very minimum, that situations change in the world outside somehow, and that to optimize its behavior for yielding better outcomes an organization would do well to take into account these changes. But the world changes a lot; there is at any given point a potentially unbounded queue of input to process, against a very decidedly bounded capacity for handling that input. A perfect system will absorb any and all input to make perfectly informed decisions on what to act upon. Alas, the world is not perfect, and we will not be stopping every day to reconsider everything possible in the light of new input. Let us call this the bounded rationality dilemma <!-- FIXME: Tätä sä et ainakaan keksinyt itse -> lähdeviite. Lisäksi kappalehan kuvaa juuri tätä -> aloita kappale tällä. -->.

As discussed in section \ref{capacity-for-reaction}, a kanban system is on one respect a visualization of work and as such serves to answer the question of *how things get done*. Taking into account the bounded rationality dilemma, the system needs to be accompanied with an answer to the related but subtly different question of *what is a thing needing to get done*. Consider the crude example of a web based service's production servers being literally on fire. This is surely a situation where a team will be reaching for the fire extinguisher without the question of consulting a kanban board. Indeed, situations do arise where taking prompt action is crucial; in other situations it is not at all clear what the salient points in the input are and what there is to be done. We can see that there would be a need for the system to be able to make out literal and figurative fires from entirely benign or even meaningless events <!-- FIXME: What? -->.

A daily embedded in a lean workflow would by necessity be different, when there might be any amount of new input for the team to absorb. Fresh customer insight, feature requests, bug reports and detected anomalies in running production systems are a few examples of what a team might want to decide on reacting to. The space of things to discuss and potential actions to take is vastly larger, giving rise to the possibility for a very different and arguably more interesting daily to emerge. Instead of kanban making the daily redundant, the combination of both is worthy of investigation.

## Dailies as practice

The previous section argues that the use of a daily in conjunction with kanban might have interesting features. To rephrase section \ref{why-daily}, the researcher finds that a hypothesis would be that the development of the software is somehow made better through this: that there's some means, some knowledge that is gained through the engaging in a daily that at least plausibly more than makes up for the time spent <!-- FIXME: Vertaa tätä kappaleeseen 1.3: mitä siellä tarvitsee sanoa? Mitä tässä tarvitsee kerrata ja miksi? -->. Drawing from section \ref{capacity-for-reaction}, if being reactive to new input is important to software development efforts, the daily may be seen as a *sensory organ* for the software development organisation to feel its way forward in a chaotic and ever-changing landscape. In other words, it helps to answer the question of *how do we know to do the right things*.

<!-- FIXME: Sinänsä hyvä kohta problematisoida eli löytää se ongelma johon sä vastaat, mutta mä menisin ennemmin sitä kautta että pitäisi katsoa tarkemmin mitä oiekast ikentällöä tehdään, eteenkin tilanteissa missä ammattilaiset "mix and matchaa" aineksia laajemmista ammatillisista agile- ja lean-diskursseista. Tällainen problematisointi voisi myös johtaa sulavammin seuravan kappaleen practice-näkökulmaan: katsomme *käytäntöä* joak sijaitsee todellisessa maailmassa kaikkine sotkuineen -->

Disregarding for now the question of *whether* there's evidence for this, what is missing is a method <!-- FIXME: a method? -->for describing *how* the daily works to do what would be purported here. Both agile and lean discourses have their own ways of discussing and arguing about their respective benefits, of course. Neither are, however, scientific discourses <!-- FIXME: Actually they are at least in part, but also exist in professional discourse. -->nor do they <!-- FIXME: the researchers of lean and agile do --> attempt to explain the underlying mechanisms of their benefits. To stand on firm ground we would like to come up with a way to describe the daily as a recurring event where knowledge is produced, made better or different in some way. In doing this we would find ourselves capable of not only showing how a real-life daily *is*, but deriving a description for the *use* of such a daily from first principles. On the corollary, failing to do so would shed some doubt on the fundamental usefulness of the activity.

The question of knowing how to do the right things brings us to the question of knowledge, as well as that of doing. What is knowing, and what is doing the right thing? How is the concept of the right thing to do formed and how is it put to action? In a society increasingly relying on expert knowledge, it comes as no surprise that there exist several fields of research impinging on these subjects. We will be looking at knowing and learning through the theoretical lens of the sociological concept of *practice*.

The *practice-based approach* of organizational research looks at knowledge as acquired, used and observed in participation, or knowing as something that is inseparable from doing \citep{nicolini2003knowing}. Practicing can be viewed as a transformative process: not only is there an equivalence between knowing and practicing, but knowledge transforms itself through use \citep{gherardi2011organizational}. This suggests that by practicing a daily we would both embody the knowledge required through the actions we take as well as gain an understanding of how our application of the knowledge served our goals. Practices are sustained by their use within a sociomaterial context, existing in a continuous state of becoming and responding to an unfolding reality. Learning can be understood as a recursive process of interaction between the practice, its practitioners and its surroundings.

The research described in this paper aims to describe the daily as a practice in the context of lean software development. Account of the practice will be given through a case study, elucidating both how a daily happens and what the outcomes are. In other words: against the background of lean principles and through the lens of practice, *what exactly is the use of a daily?*
