
# Research approach, scope and methods {#research-approach-and-scope}

The goal of the study is broadly to understand a specific practice situated within the field of software development. This premise necessitates a qualitative approach to analysis \citep{jonassen2012theoretical}. \citet{lethbridge2005studying} claim that to truly understand the process of creating software, it is essential to study it in real environments. Perhaps owing to this fact, even while qualitative studies of software practice appear relatively rare \citep{robinson2007ethnographically}, the agile discourse has a history with ethnographically-inspired studies of agile practices \citep{robinson2007ethnographically,marchenko2008scrum}.

\citet{lecompte1982problems} have characterised the ethnographical approach with emphasising observation, focusing on natural settings, using participant constructs for structuring research, and avoidance of manipulation of study variables by investigators. \citet{robinson2007ethnographically} add that the ethnographically inclined researcher attempts to understand practice on its own terms, studying the totality of it with all its messy characteristics, and aspires not to disturb the practice. Ethnography is suited for situations where unique processes of change may be observed \citep{lecompte1982problems}, which also implies that the situation or practice should be observed over a period of time \citep{jonassen2012theoretical}. The research strategy that focuses on understanding dynamics present within a single setting is called case study, which may be conducted over single or multiple cases \citep{eisenhardt1989building}.

The research method in this study is an ethnographically-inspired single case study. This means that rich data was collected by the researcher as part of the community of practice within a single setting in order to provide rich account of the practice \citep{robinson2007ethnographically}. The aim was to eventually find theory to explain the data \citep{lecompte1982problems}. This thesis applies abductive reasoning, or inference to the best explanation \citep{ketokivi2010two}, in the process of which the theoretical framework and the empirical analyses inform one another \citep{dubois2002systematic}. Field studies easily generate vast amounts of data \citep{lethbridge2005studying}, and not all of it is practical to analyse; when the researcher simultaneously collects, codes and analyses data in order to decide on the next object of inquiry by means data, this is called theoretical sampling \citep{coyne1997sampling}. The nonlinear, iterative movement between theory and empirical data is called *systematic combining* by \citet{dubois2002systematic} in their overview of abductive approaches on case research.

The context of the study is an organisation where the software development team applies both daily meetings and a kanban system in their work. The object of study is how the overlapping agile and lean practices function together and how their use might support the development team. The case is described further in section \ref{empirical-study-description}. Data was collected primarily as audio recordings from daily meetings, but it was amended with screenshots from different aspects of the kanban system and field notes, with the latter suggested for speeding up analyses by \citet{eisenhardt1989building}.

\citet{lethbridge2005studying} describe three degrees of data collection techniques suitable for field studies of software engineering. First degree techniques are observational and provide a real-time view of the phenomena, but yield material that is difficult to analyse due to both the material's density and the knowledge required to interpret it correctly. In second degree techniques, participants are studied in their environment but without the researcher being present simultaneously while the data is collected. Not necessitating direct contact between researcher and participants makes these techniques applicable for longitudinal studies. Techniques of the third degree attempt to gain information by inspecting artefacts produced by workers, which are often easily accessible and require no commitment from participants but are removed from the actual process being observed. \citet{lethbridge2005studying} note that material in the form of artefacts removed from the context of the action being studied is difficult to interpret successfully, and so recommend third degree techniques to be supplemented by other ones.

\citet{lethbridge2005studying} define the two main data collection techniques relevant to this study. Having the researcher take part in the observed practice is a first degree technique named *participant observation*. Capturing the state of the kanban system on the other hand constitutes *analysis of electronic databases of work performed*. \citet{lethbridge2005studying} place possible means of record-keeping on a spectrum according to dimensions of intrusiveness and time-intensivity. Videotape would be most complete but also most intrusive and time-intensive, while manual record keeping would be the least complete and intensive. Audio is situated in the middle of the spectrum due to being fairly complete but losing details of the physical environment. Crucial features for this study were considered to be low intrusivity for participants and sufficiently low time-intensivity with regards to analysis. The use of audio recordings as a primary source of data was found to be a reasonable compromise. The primary data also aptly serves as means of contextualizing and interpreting the secondary data captured by third degree techniques.

In analysing learning situations, \citet{jonassen2012theoretical} consider it important to understand the overall direction of the activity. They suggest that practice researchers first study broad patterns of activity before considering narrow episodic fragments. The large bodies of data produced in field studies must also be reduced to a more comprehensible format in a process of coding used to categorize the data according to a schema, which can be high level but must be guided by the goals of the research \citep{lethbridge2005studying}. The analysis in this study progressed in the following structure, starting out with preliminary analytic 'preconceptions' \citep{dubois2002systematic} and refining understanding in iterative rounds:

1. Overview of data based on field notes and audio, creation of a daily content log and outline of activities. Based on preconceptions, attention was paid on fragments that stood out as unusual.
2. A structure for the dailies was identified using the team's own constructs as a basis, with secondary and primary data corroborating each other.
3. Segments in the content log were coded according to the identified structure and catalogued for analysis.
4. Episodes of particular interest were reviewed from the audio recordings with the aid of the content log based on newly gained theoretical understanding.
5. A subset of episodes was further sampled such that episodes from different dailies could be linked thematically.

In summary, the research follows an abductive process of inference to the best explanation in search of a theory that would explain the data, as is typical of ethnographical research. Such research has been done on agile practices before, and the approach is applicable for looking into processes of change and learning. The research studies that which occurs naturally and attempts not to control the research context. This means that instead of testing hypotheses on the efficacy of different measures, we instead attempt to provide a rich, translatable account of the findings and process of reasoning such that the applicability of the resulting theoretical constructs used may be evaluated by the receiver.
