
# Empirical approach and setting

The researcher is interested in gaining a deep understanding of the practice of a daily as it occurs in the context of software development. The agile discourse has a history with ethnographically-inspired studies of agile practices \citep{robinson2007ethnographically,marchenko2008scrum}, and a similar empirical approach was chosen here. An ethnographical approach is specifically well suited for discovery of how practitioners behave within and use the practice under investigation. Given the choice of theoretical background where a sociological understanding of practice plays a significant role, and the desire to observe in context, not to interfere with and to improve, ethnography makes for a sound choice. In the sense that the research also considers parts of speech and specific manipulations of cognitive artefacts as constitutive of knowledge co-creation, the empirical study also carries microethnographical tones \citep{streeck2005microethnography}.

The research was conducted as a case study of a Helsinki-based software startup in the mobile B2B industry with a headcount of approximately 20 people and a development team consisting of at most 10 at the time of the research. The development team's habit of gathering around a collection of virtual kanban boards every morning was taken as an opportunity to learn about the practice of dailies as exercised within the context of a lean workflow. The researcher took part in the development team's dailies wearing two hats: the ordinary team member hat, which necessitated normal interaction with the team within the context of the daily, and a researcher hat which constituted of creating audio recordings. From december 2015 to january 2016, a period of time including a break for seasonal holidays, 20 individual dailies were observed and recorded. The duration was chosen both to get a representative sample of dailies and to allow for the potential discovery of a shift in the team's understanding of the system of work and the flow of work through the system. It was initially hypothesised that this change would most concretely be exemplified in the virtual kanban boards' structure. In addition to audio recordings, visual samples of the kanban boards' structure were captured at times when changes to it were called for in the daily.
