
# Data collection and analysis

## Research methodology

The data for this research was collected through the use of audio recordings. The events observed were part of the everyday proceedings of the software development team. The team was informed beforehand of the intent to record the proceedings and that the intent would not be to interfere with what occurs naturally or deploy interventions for purposes of study. The author took part in all of these events and took the same role of secretary (as described in \ref{daily-roles}) in each one. The dailies took place in a meeting room that was fitted with a table, on which a mobile device was set for purposes of recording before the beginning of each daily. Notes on what went on in each daily were made to accompany the recordings as basis for further analysis later. In addition to audio recordings, the kanban boards' structure was captured as screenshots from the virtual kanban board tool described in section \ref{daily-tools}.

Audio recordings were transferred from the recording device, an *iPhone 5S*, as *mp4* files, and played back using *VLC Player*. An initial analysis and structuring of the material was carried out for each daily by first reviewing the associated notes as a clue on possible interesting events, features, or background information useful for understanding the proceedings and then playing back the audio in a linear fashion. Notes of the audio were made in text format, logging timestamps of discussion topics and interactions that were found to be of interest. This analysis yielded an outline of dailies that is further delineated in section \ref{daily-structure}. Complete tables of the daily segments can be found in appendix section \ref{daily-segment-lengths}.

Capturing the kanban boards' structure as screenshots yielded material of two different kinds. The web software Asana described in \ref{daily-tools} presents what the researcher understood as kanban boards as a linear list. The contents of this list were captured and are presented as indexes in appendix section \ref{kanban-board-lists}. The individual kanban boards' structure, expressed likewise as a linear list of labels or 'states', was captured in a similar fashion and presented fully in appendix section \ref{kanban-board-structure}.


## Overview of collected data

From December 2015 to January 2016, a period of time including a break for seasonal holidays, 20 individual daily events were observed and recorded. The duration was chosen both to get a representative sample of dailies and to allow for the potential discovery of a shift in the team's understanding of the system of work and the flow of work through the system. It was initially hypothesised that this change would most concretely be exemplified in the virtual kanban boards' structure, and for reflecting this hypothesis the visual structure of the boards was captured for later examination.

The 20 dailies recorded altogether consist of a total of 11 hours, 59 minutes and 12 seconds of audio. According to the segment analysis the recordings could be trimmed to a total effective duration of 11 hours, 33 minutes and 21 seconds constituting the entirety of what was considered as the daily activities. The average effective duration of a daily was 34 minutes and 40 seconds. Readily it can be observed that these dailies were not conformant to the Scrum-espoused ideal of a maximum of *15 minutes* per daily. Complete tables of duration data can be found in appendix section \ref{daily-durations}.
