- Eiks "how is a daily transformed within the practice thereof" oo aika kova kysymys empirialle?
- Jos on, voisko loput kysymykset asettaa jotenkin tän valossa? Niinku vaikka että miltä se sosiomateriaalinen ympäristö näyttää, miten se tukee practicea?
- "What 'subpractices' can we observe to constitute the daily practice?"
  - The inbox pruning practice
  - The fire extinguishing practice
  - The "general stuff" practice: "what do we know?", "what's new today?"
- How are other practices represented within this practice?
- What is the relation of these inpractices to outpractices? For example:
  - Inbox pruning is related to several practices which constitute the entirety of the input to the inbox
  - Cycles are related to product increment design and release practices, which happen outside the daily, and the reducing of a cycle scope which partially *does* happen in the daily ("it hasn't been thought of yet" vs "because they always tend to go on for too long and so have to be cut", which can be found in the material)
  - The *labels within boards* are representations of development practice **on the level of an individual task**
  - The *boards* are simultaneously representations of the daily practice *and* of the the practice of software development **on the level of teams, competencies, feature increments**

- "How does the team reconcile the boundaries to outside practices?"
  - The subpractice of inbox pruning can be seen to constitute the reconciliation of the problems generated by the knowledge boundary between the team and the outside world \cite{carlile2002pragmatic}

- The daily is a vehicle for the team to make perspective \cite{boland1995perspective} on itself. Through taking so it will be better equipped to take perspective on others and to reconcile the inevitable problems at the boundary

### Mihin kysymykseen tää vastaa? Johonkin!

Opportunities given to groups of practitioners to discuss their practices
- foster reflexive learning
- lay the bases for bringing tools of daily work and the tools of analysis and design closer together


### Entäs tää? Liittyy tohon yllä olevaan juttuun representaatioista

*"The representation of practice, by the researcher or with the researcher, is a stimulus for explicitation of that knowledge entangled in doing which may enable better verbal expression of what is known and is enacted in doing, and of which the individual may have scant awareness"* \cite{gherardi2011organizational}
